---
title: You Don't Need Stream Deck, You Need Macros
description: How you can make your life easier by creating your own keyboard shortcuts and why you don't really need a device like Stream Deck for that.
tags: ['Productivity', 'Tools']
date: 2025-02-06
---
One day during one of those meetings when I don't have to pay my full attention to, I was doing some work in the background. I've muted my microphone - try to get a mechanical keyboard and you will quickly understand why that's necessary - and I was coding away. Suddenly, someone asked me a question. "Now, where is that goddamn Teams window so I can unmute my microphone?!" - I asked myself, frantically going through my MacOS desktops. I use multiple desktops (or workspaces as some other operating systems call them), each has one to three apps opened there, so instead of shuffling 20 apps opened on one desktop, I shuffle 10 desktops scattered across three monitors. It took me a few seconds of an awkward silence before I found it. And it wasn't even the first time this happened to me.

"There has to be a better way!" - I thought, again, not for the first time. I've decided that it's time to figure out how to set up a "global mute/unmute" button that would work regardless of whether the Teams (or any other videoconferencing app) has the focus or not. One of the way to solve this problem was to use Elgato's Stream Deck. I've been eyeing it for some time - many developers claimed it's a very useful device.

## Is Stream Deck really indispensable for a software developer?

"Stream deck is a fantastic tool and every developer should have one ([or three](https://www.reddit.com/r/streamdeckprofiles/comments/y1xger/comment/itkcz9j/?context=3))!" is something that I've heard [here](https://dev.to/kurtissfrost/power-at-your-fingertips-3c7k) and [there](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dL9-MnQl1Wg). I've put it on a shopping list for Black Friday hoping I could get a good deal for it. But as the Black Friday was getting close, I asked myself - *do I **really** need one*? The main driver for me was to have a global mute/unmute button for those Teams calls when I'm doing something else and suddenly need to unmute myself. Pressing a button to unmute my microphone, say what I need to say and mute it again, without shuffling through multiple windows and desktops would be a bliss. But that doesn't justify shelling out over $100 (or less, for the "mini" version) and putting another device on my already cluttered desk. So I've started reading what other things people do with Stream Deck, especially if they are not streamers, but developers, like me.

There are some good reasons to buy a Stream Deck. For example, if you [SSH to many servers, talk with many people on Slack, generate different Stripe test cases, switch between many Spotify playlists, work on different VS Code projects and push code to different GitHub repositories](https://adam.ac/blog/stream-deck-for-developers/) - all that on a daily basis, then you will probably benefit from using a device that can reduce all those tasks to a press of a button or two. It sounds more useful for people who prefer to click things and press buttons, instead of typing all the commands in the terminal. Or those who spend most of the time in one piece of software like AutoCAD or Photoshop, where creating and assigning macros to hardware buttons will save them time - not to mention that in this line of work you're anyway using a drawing tablet, so you're used to using different devices apart from a keyboard.

There are some *weird but ok* reasons to buy it. Some people use it for home automation - ok, but I'm not going to run to my office to toggle lights in the bedroom. Some use it to start applications - fine, but for me firing up a launcher like Spotlight/Alfred, typing 2-3 first letters of the app I want to start and pressing enter seems equally fast as pressing a button on an external device[^1].

But a typical software developer spends most of their day pressing keys on a keyboard. Everything that Stream Deck does, can also be achieved by pressing one or more keys. Some actions will trigger a shortcut, some are equivalent to typing commands in the terminal or running a script. **Stream Deck is a glorified macro recorder**. It comes with a nice app that makes it easier to record those macros. It has colorful icons that catch your eye and pressing a physical button is easier than remembering what was the shortcut for a specific macro. But most of its functionality can be achieved by recording macros on your computer. If you have a manageable number of macros (or a very good memory of all the shortcuts you defined), it might actually be easier to use your keyboard to trigger the macros.

Stream Deck is not a big device (especially if you go for the mini version that comes with six buttons), but it's another device that you would need to carry with you if you go somewhere. Keyboard on the other hand is usually an integrated part of your computer. Where you computer goes, your keyboard goes too.

:::callout-info
Actually, I bought the Stream Deck after writing and implementing all the tips from this article. I got a good deal for it during Black Friday and I could always return it if I saw that I really wasn't using it that much. After a couple of days - I liked it and decided to keep it. While I still think you can write keyboard macros that can do the same things as an external device, remembering how to trigger those macros gets harder the more macros you have. A device like Stream Deck (or one of its cheaper or more customizable alternatives) is just more convenient for me. Pressing a colorful button with a label takes no mental effort, while trying to remember how to trigger some less often used shortcut was sometimes a bit more demanding if I were in the middle of thinking about something else.

I decided to keep the Stream Deck, because I found several additional uses for it (that I will describe in another article). If I were to use it only to mute/unmute my microphone, I would definitely stick with the macro on my keyboard instead.
<!-- TODO: Link to the 2nd article when it's ready  -->
:::

## How do I find unused key combinations?

One things that is great about Stream Deck or a similar device is that all of their buttons come with different key codes. There is no risk that pressing a button on that device will trigger a different action, for example, from the currently opened application. But if you want to start assigning custom shortcuts on you keyboard, this might be a problem.

When defining keyboard shortcuts that will trigger your macros, you need to find a combination of keys that is not used by any application. Otherwise, if you try to use a shortcut, the current application will intercept it and perform a completely different action. Assigning custom actions to shortcuts like "cmd+s" (or "ctrl+s" for Linux/Windows users) or "cmd+w" are off the table, because in most programs they are already used to save the file or quite the app.

Luckily, there are some combinations of modifiers that are rarely used called the *Hyper key* (shift+cmd+ctrl+option on Mac and shift+windows+ctrl+alt on Windows) and *Meh key* (shift+ctrl+option on Mac and shift+ctrl+alt on Windows). They are not the easiest thing to press, because for a keyboard shortcut that uses the Hyper key, you will need to press 4 modifier keys and another key assigned to a shortcut. But many external keyboards have additional keys that you can use and assign Hyper or Meh keys there (that's what I did with my Kinesis Advantage keyboard). And even the built-in keyboards have keys that you can live without (the "Caps Lock" key is fairly unused - unless you need to *shout* a lot on the internet) and can be converted into a special key.

I decided that before I buy the Stream Deck, I will try to implement some useful macros first. I used [BetterTouchTool](https://folivora.ai/) or BTT for short - which is my preferred way to define macros on a Macbook (I bought it years ago to customize the touchbar on my previous laptop and I've been using it since then). I configured the "Esc" key to act as Hyper (so "shift+cmd+ctrl+alt" ) and "Insert" to act as Meh (so "shift+ctrl+alt"). Both those keys were previously unused - I'm using "Caps Lock" as the Esc key and the "Insert" key is basically a second backslash key on Kinesis Advantage2 keyboard.

{% postImage "kinesis_advantage2_layout.jpg", "Kinesis Advantage2 layout", "", "Unused key on my keyboard that could be used as Meh" %}

Next, I've decided to make an easy to remember split of functionality of those custom shortcuts. The Hyper key would be used in shortcuts that start some applications and Meh key would be used for all the other macros. Ideally, the first letter of the application's name could be used as the shortcut to open it, so for example `Hyper + o` would open the Obsidian app, `Hyper + i` would start iTerm and `Hyper + f` would start Finder. Of course, not every app could have a shortcut like that (e.g. if two apps started with the same letter, one would need a different shortcut). But I've decided to limit the number of application shortcuts to only those that I used multiple times per day. If the app was already opened, pressing its shortcut would switch to the desktop with that app and bring it to the front.

Next, it was time for more advanced macros that I used with the Meh modifier:

- `Meh + m`: mute/unmute the microphone. This shortcut triggers a "Run Apple Script (blocking)" from BTT that runs an [applescript to toggle current's microphone volume between 0 and 100](https://gist.github.com/AliKarpuzoglu/a5ce01c5a3812094a91d3d6e22fd12b4) and displays a notification. To make sure I don't get confused whether my microphone is muted or not, I've added [this BTT widget](https://community.folivora.ai/t/microphone-mute-unmute-widget/1579) to display an icon in the menu bar indicating the status of the microphone.
- `Meh + p`: triggers the "Play/Pause" action in BTT to toggle the currently playing music or any other video or audio. I could achieve the same by pressing the button on my headphones, but still, my fingers are on the keyboard so pressing a keyboard shortcut is faster.
- `Meh + n`: sets "Do not disturb" status for 1 hour. This hides all the notifications and it's very useful during screen-sharing sessions to make sure no weird message pops up in the middle of a presentation. I have an Apple Shortcut that sets the "Do not disturb" status and accepts a parameter defining for how long it should be set. This shortcut came with the [Calm notifications](https://alfred.app/workflows/vitor/calm-notifications/) workflow for Alfred and all I have to do is to trigger it from the BTT with "Run Shortcut from Shortcuts App" action (optionally followed by "Show notification" action to get a popup confirming the correct execution of the shortcut).
- `Meh + t`: bring Teams window to the foreground. This is done using the "Show/Hide Specific Application" action in the BTT and it saves me from figuring out where is my Teams window during calls.

Those are the most useful shortcuts I could think of. This setup was not without flaws and I solved them when I bought the Stream Deck. But it was good enough to start.

What were the flaws? For example, the play/pause button usually works for the last multimedia played, but sometimes it's a bit random. This was an issue when I had Spotify app opened (which is always opened) and a YouTube video paused in one of the browser tabs. Sometimes this macro would work on Spotify, when I wanted it to start the video and sometimes it was starting a video somewhere in my browser when I wanted it to stop the currently playing music [^2]. That was quite annoying and with Stream Deck I've solved this problem by having a separate button for Spotify and another one for "multimedia".

Or the mute/unmute button. It worked well, but with Stream Deck, I can get a plugin that controls Teams client directly and toggles the mute/unmute setting in the video call. This approach is more convenient because then everyone in the call can see an icon indicating that I'm muted (and can tell me "hey, you're muted" when I try to say something). An "operating system-wide mute" is not reflected in Teams and I've noticed that it's more confusing to people during the calls.

Those few macros are great if you need to simplify some common actions on your computer. But as I wrote in the side note about my experience after buying the Stream Deck, the more macros you have, the more you have to think how to trigger each one. This can be distracting when you are in the middle of a highly focused task. So I gave Stream Deck a chance and ended up keeping it. Stay tuned for the 2nd article where I will show you my Stream Deck setup and share my thoughts after a few months of using it.

---

[^1]:  I was wrong with this statement, pressing a button to open an app sometimes is more convenient. Especially when I'm doing something else on my main screen and I can press the button on an external device without losing my focus.
[^2]: And DJ "Spotify mixed with a random YouTube video" is terrible.
